Explore connectivity options (#2285)
giantswarm/docs: src/content/getting-started/understand-connectivity/_index.md

---
title: Control the application connectivity
description: Understand how basic connectivity works in the platform and which options are available for exposing your app.
weight: 60
last_review_date: 2024-09-01
menu:
  principal:
    parent: getting-started
    identifier: getting-started-understand-connectivity
owner:

>   - https://github.com/orgs/giantswarm/teams/sig-cabbage

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - https://github.com/orgs/giantswarm/teams/team-cabbage
```

/ curl -Is hello-world.default
/ <TIMEOUT>
```

## Step 3: Allow DNS traffic

As we mentioned before, we harden the clusters restricting the communication with pods in `kube-system` and `giantswarm` namespaces. In case you need to allow communication with a running pod in one of those namespaces you have to explicitly declare it. In the next example we enable the DNS traffic from the `debug-toolbox` pod:

```yaml
kind: NetworkPolicy
apiVersion: networking.k8s.io/v1
metadata:
  name: debug-toolbox-dns
  namespace: default
spec:
  egress:
  - ports:
    - port: 53
      protocol: UDP
    - port: 1053
      protocol: UDP
    to:
    - namespaceSelector:
        matchLabels:
          name: kube-system
  podSelector:
    matchLabels:
      app: debug-toolbox
  policyTypes:
  - Egress
```

__Warning__: By default, clusters run CoreDNS listening on port 1053 (for security reasons). So, you will need to include port `1053` on the list of ports.

Note that the policy is already deployed in the `default` namespace due to the chart enabled by default. It allows the DNS queries to be resolved like:

```sh
$ kubectl exec debug-toolbox -- nslookup hello-world
Server:		172.31.0.10

> Address:	172.31.0.10:53

Author: ```suggestion
Address: 172.31.0.10:53
```

> Name:	hello-world.default.svc.cluster.local

Author: ```suggestion
Name: hello-world.default.svc.cluster.local
```

> Address: 172.31.104.47

Author: ```suggestion
Address: 172.31.104.47
```

/ curl -Is hello-world.default
/ HTTP/1.1 200 OK
/ ...
```

### Step 5: Allowing pod to pod access within a namespace

One last interesting scenario to explore is allowing pod-to-pod access within a namespace. In some cases, like in a test environment, you should enable all pods to communicate by default within the same namespace. In the following example, we allow pods to in the `default` namespace to communicate with each other.

```yaml
kind: NetworkPolicy
apiVersion: networking.k8s.io/v1
metadata:
  name: allow-default-namespace
  namespace: default
spec:
  podSelector:
  ingress:
 - from:
 - namespaceSelector:
          matchLabels:
            name: default
```

Note that the namespace you apply this policy too needs to carry a label `name:` similar to the actual name key in its metadata:

```sh
$ kubectl label namespace default name=default
```

Now let's delete all network policies and apply the `allow-default-namespace` policy so we can verify it works:

```sh
kubectl delete netpol --all -n default
kubectl apply -f allow-default-namespace.yaml
$ kubectl exec -it debug-toolbox -- sh
/ curl -Is hello-world.default
/ HTTP/1.1 200 OK
```

> We've learnt how network policies work and the peculiarities in Giant Swarm clusters. However, the ideal configuration is to have a default deny policy in all your namespaces and allow only the necessary traffic to your applications. This way, you can control the traffic in your cluster and avoid any security issues.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This guide has introduced how network policies work and some peculiarities to be aware of when working in Giant Swarm clusters. However, the ideal configuration is to have a default deny policy in all namespaces, and allow only the necessary traffic to and from each application. This approach greatly improves security, and ensures cluster traffic is intentionally and declaratively managed.
```

## Next step

> Since you learnt how to configure your application to communicate with other services, now let's dive into how [observe your application]({{< relref "/getting-started/observe-your-app" >}}).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now that you've learned how to configure your application to communicate with other services, let's dive into how [observe your application]({{< relref "/getting-started/observe-your-app" >}}).
```

/ <TIMEOUT>
```

## Step 3: Allow DNS traffic

As previously mentioned, workload clusters are hardened by default and restrict communication with pods in Giant Swarm-managed namespaces, like `kube-system` and `giantswarm`. If an application needs access to a pod running on one of those namespaces, the access must be explicitly declared. The next example will enable traffic from the `debug-toolbox` pod to the cluster DNS service, which runs in a restricted namespace:

```yaml
kind: NetworkPolicy
apiVersion: networking.k8s.io/v1
metadata:
  name: debug-toolbox-dns
  namespace: default
spec:
  egress:
  - ports:
    - port: 53
      protocol: UDP
    - port: 1053
      protocol: UDP
    to:
    - namespaceSelector:
        matchLabels:
          name: kube-system
  podSelector:
    matchLabels:
      app: debug-toolbox
  policyTypes:
  - Egress
```

__Warning__: By default, clusters run CoreDNS listening on port 1053 (for security reasons). So, you will need to include port `1053` on the list of ports.

Note that the policy is already deployed in the `default` namespace due to the chart enabled by default. It allows the DNS queries to be resolved like:

```sh

> $ kubectl exec debug-toolbox -- nslookup hello-world
> Server:		172.31.0.10
> Address: 172.31.0.10:53
> 
> Name: hello-world.default.svc.cluster.local
> Address: 172.31.104.47

Author: ```suggestion
kubectl exec debug-toolbox -- nslookup hello-world
Server: 172.31.0.10
Address: 172.31.0.10:53

Name: hello-world.default.svc.cluster.local
Address: 172.31.104.47
```

    matchLabels:
      app.kubernetes.io/name: hello-world
  ingress:
    - from:
      - podSelector:
          matchLabels:
            app: debug-toolbox
      ports:
        - port: 8080
          protocol: TCP
```

Apply the policy and check the connectivity:

```sh
$ kubectl apply -f allow-debug-toolbox-to-hello-world.yaml
$ kubectl exec -it debug-toolbox -- sh
/ curl -Is hello-world.default
/ HTTP/1.1 200 OK
/ ...
```

### Step 5: Allowing pod to pod access within a namespace

One last interesting scenario to explore is allowing pod-to-pod access within a namespace. In some cases, like in a test environment, it may be necessary to enable all pods to communicate by default within the same namespace. The following example allows all pods in the `default` namespace to communicate with each other.

```yaml
kind: NetworkPolicy
apiVersion: networking.k8s.io/v1
metadata:
  name: allow-default-namespace
  namespace: default
spec:
  podSelector:
  ingress:
 - from:
 - namespaceSelector:
          matchLabels:
            name: default
```

Note that the namespace to which this policy applies needs to carry a label `name:` similar to the actual name key in its metadata:

```sh

> $ kubectl label namespace default name=default

Author: ```suggestion
kubectl label namespace default name=default
```
